=head1 NAME

PDL::Modules - A guide to PDL's module reference.


=head1 DESCRIPTION

This page serves as a table of contents for PDL's module documentation.
This page does not list every single PDL module. It only shows the ones
intended for PDL users, while omitting those which are deemed "for
internal use only". If you wish to see a comprehensive list of all
documentation, please see the L<PDL::Index> page.

=head1 LOOKING FOR A FUNCTION?

If you want to search for a function name, you should use the PDL
shell along with the "help" or "apropos" command (to do a fuzzy search).
For example:

 pdl> apropos xval
 xlinvals        X axis values between endpoints (see xvals).
 xlogvals        X axis values logarithmicly spaced...
 xvals           Fills an ndarray with X index values...
 yvals           Fills an ndarray with Y index values. See the CAVEAT for xvals.
 zvals           Fills an ndarray with Z index values. See the CAVEAT for xvals.

To learn more about the PDL shell, see L<perldl>.

=head1 FOUNDATION

=over 5

=item L<perldl>

Learn about the PDL shell.

=back

=head2 Functions

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Core>

Core module (e.g. creating ndarrays).

=item L<PDL::Basic>

Simplified interface to the more general PDL::Primitive.

=item L<PDL::Ops>

Basic operators (e.g. arithmetic, comparisons, etc.).

=item L<PDL::Ufunc>

Functions that accumulate along a dimension (e.g. sum, max).

=back

=head2 Other Features

=over 5

=item L<PDL::AutoLoader>

MATLAB-style function autoloader.

=item L<PDL::Slices>

Indexing and slices. How to access a subset of an ndarray.

=item L<PDL::NiceSlice>

Nicer syntax for slices.

=back



=head1 MISCELLANEOUS

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Primitive>

Fundamental operations on ndarrays.

=item L<PDL::Bad>

Bad value support.

=item L<PDL::Reduce>

A 'reduce' function for PDL.

=item L<PDL::Lite>

Minimum PDL module OO loader.

=item L<PDL::LiteF>

Minimum PDL module function loader.

=item L<PDL::Func>

Interpolation-related functions.

=back



=head1 IMAGE PROCESSING

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Compression>

Compression utilities.

=item L<PDL::Image2D>

2-dimensional image processing.

=item L<PDL::ImageND>

N-dimensional image processing.

=item L<PDL::ImageRGB>

RGB image data handling.

=back

=head1 NUMERICAL METHODS

=over 5

=item L<PDL::FFT>

Fast Fourier Transform (native implementation).

=back


=head1 COORDINATE TRANSFORMATIONS

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Transform>

Coordinate transforms, image warping, and N-D functions.

=item L<PDL::Transform::Cartography>

Cartographic projections.

=back



=head1 IO FUNCTIONS

=over 5

=item L<PDL::IO>

Overview of IO functions.

=item L<PDL::IO::Dumper>

Data dumper.

=item L<PDL::IO::FastRaw>

Fast storage format (outdated).

=item L<PDL::IO::FlexRaw>

Flexible storage format.

=item L<PDL::IO::Misc>

Misc IO routines.

=item L<PDL::IO::Storable>

Support for Perl's L<Storable> module.

=back


=head2 Image Formats

=over 5

=item L<PDL::IO::FITS>

PDL support for FITS images.

=item L<PDL::IO::Pnm>

PDL support for PNM images.

=back



=head1 2D MATRICES

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Matrix>

Convenience class for 2D matrix work.

=item L<PDL::MatrixOps>

Additional matrix operators.

=back



=head1 ADVANCED

=over 5

=item L<PDL::Dbg>

PDL debugger.

=item L<PDL::DiskCache>

Manage many ndarrays through a disk cache.

=item L<PDL::Objects>

If you want to sub-class from PDL.

=back


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2010 Daniel Carrera (dcarrera@gmail.com). You can distribute
and/or modify this document under the same terms as the current Perl
license.

See: http://dev.perl.org/licenses/
